Anchorage, AK June 5, 2021
 
Alaska to be named the first state to pass the Federal Child Welfare Review
 
Federal Reviewers have named Alaska the first state in the nation to pass the Child and Family Services Review (CSFR).  According to the Children’s Bureau, CSFRs are periodic reviews of a state’s child welfare system and seek to ensure that states are following all federal child welfare requirements, determine how families are engaging with their local child welfare agencies and to help ensure the best outcomes for families.  Alaska’s prior CSFR was completed in May 2017 with the outcome involving a Program Improvement Plan (PIP) due to an overall failure of the review.  In speaking to the Director of the Office of Children’s Services, Alaska’s Child Welfare agency, there are many factors that contributed to Alaska’s success – mainly the upgrade of Alaska’s Child Welfare database.
 
Over the past four years, the database, also known as ‘ORCA’ (Online Resource for the Children of Alaska), was updated to include such features as mobile access, mobile printing, direct dictation and a new data tracking system that is individualized to each employee.  According to Director Lawton, where workers would once spend hours taking hand-written notes and then typing or dictating them to a dictation service only to have to then copy them into the database, workers are now able to dictate directly into the database at any point in time, whether in the office or in the field.  Furthermore, having mobile access to the database has helped to achieve a goal of almost 90% documentation of all notes and case plans.  The addition of the ability to print directly from the database from anywhere in the state has proved to be a tremendous success, particularly for workers serving rural areas. Tasks such as creating case plans or requests for funds for foster parents, which once had to be completed in the office and then, somehow, provided to the foster parent or parent, are now immediately delivered at the time of development.  
 
The individualized tracking, known as a dashboard, provides all workers, supervisors and managers immediate access to data and assists in organizing and prioritizing work.  That prioritization of tasks and time saved in documentation has allowed workers to focus on referrals for services for families and home visits with children and parents.  The backlog of investigations (also known as Initial Assessments) is consistently hovering at 60 days, meaning that from the time a worker receives a report to investigate to the complete closure of that investigation, there is a lag time of only 60 days.  Director Lawton points out that most investigations are resolved within a week or so of the department receiving the report, however, the documentation required to close the investigation in the database takes much longer and this accounts for the 60 days’ timeframe; prior to the updates of the database, the closing of many investigations was taking more than 100 days. Furthermore, in larger areas like Anchorage, a worker may have 50 or more open investigations at one time and therefore prioritization of the work needing to be completed was often difficult and overwhelming for workers; with the new dashboard and point-in-time access to data, workers are able to prioritize and therefore meet the federally set deadlines needed to ensure safety of children.
 
Retention of workers is a consistent struggle for the OCS and all Child Welfare agencies across the nation.  The national average of retention of a worker is 18 months.  This constant turn-over causes cases to be opened longer than needed and may result in less than sufficient services provided to families. Although data has yet to be collected on retention rates correlated with better technology, since the implementation of the new features to the database, the department has noticed a significant decrease in the amount of turn-over of their front-line workers and supervisors.
 
Most importantly, according to Director Lawton, these updated features have provided additional transparency and the ability to offer better services to the children and families served by the department and therefore result in safer children and stronger families.  Alaska is proud to lead the way for the nation in keeping our children safe.
 
Sandra DeHart-Mayor, MSW
Social Services Program Officer
ORCA Project Supervisor
Office of Children’s Services
Direct: 907.269.4021 
